Novice R: Publishing (#192)
merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io: r-publishing.Rmd

# Publishing {#r-publishing}

## Questions {#r-publishing-questions}

```{r, child="questions/r-publishing.md"}
```

## Why should I share my work on the internet?

> A key part of any project is communicating what you have learned.  You've already seen how to create documents to communicate your work with Rmarkdown, and how to host whole projects on GitHub.  This chapter is about sharing your work through a webpage on the internet. Some advantages of sharing your work on a webpage include:

Author: Yes, good catch, and thanks for making this suggestion everywhere (it was probably tedious)

By the end of this chapter, you'll be able to take an Rmarkdown document that lives on your computer and share it with the world through a link to your own webpage.  

## What does it take to get a webpage online?

To understand what it takes to get a webpage online, it helps to understand roughly what happens when you point your browser at a web address.  When you point your browser at an address, for example https://merely-useful.github.io/r-publishing.html, the following things happen:

1. The name `https://merely-useful.github.io` is converted to an address of a computer that has the relevant files for this website.  This computer is also known as the website host. 
2. The browser requests the file `r-publishing.html` from the host.
3. The browser reads the contents of `r-publishing.html` and displays it for you in the browser window.  

In reverse order this process also describes what you need to do to get your own website online:

1. You need an HTML file that describes what people should see on your page.
2. You need to host the HTML file on a computer on the internet.
3. You need a way to associate a URL with the address of your host.

> In this chapter, you'll learn a process for getting your work online that leverages what you already know --- creating HTML files using Rmarkdown (#1 above), and you know how to host your work in a GitHub repository (#2).  The third step will be handled by a service GitHub provides called [GitHub Pages][gh-pages].  By following some conventions that GitHub Pages expects, you'll be able to make a webpage for any of your repositories available at: `http://{{your_username}}.github.io/{{repo_name}}`.

Reviewer: Should we mention why our name is without a repo part? https://merely-useful.github.io/

> In this chapter, you'll learn a process for getting your work online that leverages what you already know --- creating HTML files using Rmarkdown (#1 above), and you know how to host your work in a GitHub repository (#2).  The third step will be handled by a service GitHub provides called [GitHub Pages][gh-pages].  By following some conventions that GitHub Pages expects, you'll be able to make a webpage for any of your repositories available at: `http://{{your_username}}.github.io/{{repo_name}}`.

Author: Good point! I'll add this to the end of the "What does it take to get your work on a webpage?" section.

In practice you'll probably start thinking about a website once you've already done a lot of work on a project --- your project will already have some analysis documented in Rmarkdown, be in version control, and hosted on GitHub.  However, so that we can work with a specific example, you'll set up a project in this section that is less developed than where your project might be when you start thinking about making a website.

At the end of this section, you should have an RStudio project with an example report in `report.Rmd`.  This project should also be on GitHub at `https://github.com/{{your_username}}/sharing-work`, where `{{your_username}}` should be substituted with your GitHub username, e.g. mine is at https://github.com/cwickham/sharing-work.

Let's start by creating a new project called, `sharing-work` by running the following on the RStudio console:
```{r new-project, eval = FALSE}
usethis::create_project("sharing-work")
```

Once the project opens, set it up to use version control by running:
```{r add-git, eval = FALSE}
usethis::use_git()
```

Then add it as a repository on GitHub:
```{r add-github, eval = FALSE}

> usethis::use_github()

Author: Yeah, not sure if this was the best way to handle this setup.  I guess it depends on what we do in the "Version Control" section.  I'll leave for now, and perhaps we revisit in the future.

```

Then so we have a report to work with, create a new R Markdown file ("File -> New File -> R Markdown"), making sure to leave the "Default Output Format" as HTML.  Save this new file as `report.Rmd`.

Commit these changes and push your repository to GitHub.  This is our starting point.

> TODO: Would it be better to get to this point by getting learners to fork a repo, then "New project -> From version control" in RStudio? Except forking isn't in the plan for the Version Control section.

Author: Yeah, good idea.  Let's do whatever they are most comfortable from the Version Control chapter.

Try visiting: `https://{{your_username}}.github.io/sharing-work/report.html`.  You should see your report.  Congratulations you have a webpage!

### Getting a default page to display when people visit the project site

You could send people the link, `https://{{your_username}}.github.io/sharing-work/report.html`, but it is often nicer to send them the shorter version without the file name: `https://{{your_username}}.github.io/sharing-work`.  You can try this now, but it won't work --- you'll see a message in your browser like: "404- File not found".  This shorter URL points to a directory as opposed to a file.  By default, when a server receives a request for a directory, it looks for a file to display with a default name --- usually `index.html`.  In your case there is no file called `index.html` so there is nothing to display.

If you would like the contents of `report.html` to be displayed as the homepage of your project, then rename `report.Rmd` to `index.Rmd`.  You'll then need to regenerate the HTML file, remove `index.html`, commit, and push your changes.   For work that is communicated easily in one page, this would be a good option. 

> Alternatively, you might have a different page as the default page --- one that summarizes the project and then links to other more detailed pages.  You'll see how to do this over the next few sections.  To get started create a new Rmarkdown document.  Delete **all** the contents of the file, and then copy and paste in the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you might have a different page as the default page --- one that summarizes the project and then links to other more detailed pages.  You'll see how to do this over the next few sections.  To get started create a new R Markdown document.  Delete **all** the contents of the file, and then copy and paste in the following:
```

To add a link to `report.html` in `index.Rmd` I would add a line like:

```markdown
See the [full report](report.html)
```

You should use relative URLs to reference any of **your** files (i.e. those in `docs/`). That way if you ever rename your repository, move it, or use a different hosting platform, your links will all work without changes.  You must use absolute links for files that reside elsewhere on the internet.

### Exercise: Relative links

Imagine your `docs/` folder had the following structure:

```
├── docs
│   ├── index.Rmd
│   ├── index.html
│   ├── diagrams
│   │   └── workflow.png
|   ├── reports
|   │   ├── jan.Rmd
|   │   ├── jan.html
|   │   ├── feb.Rmd
|   │   └── feb.html
└── sharing-work.Rproj
```

Using a relative URL, how would you refer to:

* `jan.html` from `index.html`?
* `feb.html` from `jan.html`?
* `workflow.png` from `index.html`?

### Exercise: Add links to `index.html`

Add to `index.Rmd`:

* a link to `report.html` using a relative link, and
* a link your GitHub repository using an absolute link.

### Linking to sections within a page

> URLs can also refer to places inside the current page, most usually to another section.  In Rmarkdown you've seen you create headings using `#`.  For example, an Appendix subsection might be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
URLs can also refer to places inside the current page, most usually to another section.  In R Markdown you've seen you create headings using `#`.  For example, an Appendix subsection might be:
```

```markdown
## Appendix
```

If we want to link to this section from elsewhere, you  proceed the section name with `#` in the URL.  For example, if this section is in `report.Rmd` and you want to link to it elsewhere in `report.Rmd`, you could use:
```markdown
See more details in the [appendix](#appendix)
```

> The URL `#appendix` is interpreted as the heading with ID `appendix` in the current page.  Rmarkdown creates IDs for all sections (and subsections) automatically, by converting to lower case and replacing spaces with dashes (`-`).  But, you can explicitly set IDs too, by adding the ID with the `#` inside curly braces after the section heading.  For instance you might prefer the shorter `appen` ID.  You need to set it where the heading occurs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The URL `#appendix` is interpreted as the heading with ID `appendix` in the current page.  R Markdown creates IDs for all sections (and subsections) automatically, by converting to lower case and replacing spaces with dashes (`-`).  But, you can explicitly set IDs too, by adding the ID with the `#` inside curly braces after the section heading.  For instance you might prefer the shorter `appen` ID.  You need to set it where the heading occurs:
```

```markdown
## Appendix {#appen}
```

Then you can link to it using this shorter ID elsewhere:
```markdown
See more details in the [appendix](#appen)
```

You can also use this strategy to link to sections in other pages by including the relative URL first.  For instance, to refer to this "Appendix" section from `index.html` you could include in `index.Rmd`:
```markdown
Some gory details of the analysis can also be found in the [Appendix of the report](report.html#appen)
```

### Exercise: Add and link to a section in `report.Rmd`

Add a new section to `report.Rmd` and include a link to it in `index.Rmd`.  You'll need to Knit both `report.Rmd` and `index.Rmd`, and commit and push the HTML files to check your work.

> ### Including images

Reviewer: I think it would be useful to include how to resize images with `{}` in this section.

```
[A picture of me](images/me.png){width=50} # default unit is px
[A picture of me](images/me.png){width=50%}
```

Author: This is new to me!  I'll add.

> Most of your images will be generated by R chunks in your Rmarkdown files and be included automatically.  If you want to include display other images, you use the same syntax you saw in the [Markdown section of the Reproducibility chapter](#r-reproducibility-markdown) chapter.  That is, in your RMarkdown file you'll include the image with something like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of your images will likely be generated by R chunks in your R Markdown files and be included automatically.  If you want to include display other images, you use the same syntax you saw in the [Markdown section of the Reproducibility chapter](#r-reproducibility-markdown) chapter.  That is, in your R Markdown file you'll include the image with something like:
```

```
├── docs
│   ├── index.Rmd
│   ├── index.html
│   ├── images
│   │   └── me.png
│   ├── report.Rmd
│   └── report.html
└── sharing-work.Rproj
```

You could include it in `index.html` by adding to `index.Rmd` the line:
```markdown
![A picture of me](images/me.png)
```

Notice the syntax is very similar to adding a link to `me.png`:
```markdown
[A picture of me](images/me.png)
```
*Including* the image displays the image inside at the appropriate place in the current page, *linking* to the image requires a viewer to click the link to see the image.

### Exercise: Add an image to `index.html`

Include an image in your `index.Rmd`.  *(If you need an image to include you could always [build your own version of an Octocat][gh-myoctocat], GitHub's mascot).*

Don't forget, you'll need to commit your re-Knit `index.html` and your image.

## Exercise: Add a website to an existing project

Add a website to one of your existing project repositories.  You'll need to complete the following steps:

* Create a `docs/` directory in your project.

> * Add an `index.Rmd` Rmarkdown document to the `docs/` folder, knit it to HTML to produce `index.html`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add an `index.Rmd` R Markdown document to the `docs/` folder, knit it to HTML to produce `index.html`.
```
